As the COP26 meetings ended on Sunday, it quickly became clear that the region that
will suffer the worst economic and social effects of rising temperatures—and that can
least afford to cope with challenges climate change will bring—gained very little in
Glasgow. Little agreement was reached on how to compensate African countries for
the damage that centuries of fossil fuels and other emissions in rich countries will
have on Africa’s development prospects owing to the current and future effects of
climate change
—demands compensatory
financing from the Global North to the Global South, especially Africa.
Yet, no agreement was reached on this pressing issue during two weeks of
negotiations. The costs of failure of action, and the stark choices African countries will
face, are daunting. Indeed, as laid out in the report 
 the challenges for the private, public, and nonprofit sectors, as
well as for farmers, the informal economy, and formal firms, are great—at both the
macroeconomic and microeconomic levels. They will affect people in rural areas, small
towns, and cities, in drylands and in areas where flooding will increase, threatening
the provision of health, education, and other services.  In the end, as I recently
explored in a chapter in 
, the biggest losers from a lack of agreement are
Africa’s youth, who will suffer the most from the effects of man-made climate change.
Mitigation vs. adaptation
. The unfairness of the current situation—where today’s rich countries
reached the highest levels of material welfare the world has ever seen primarily by
harnessing cheap energy from fossil fuels, but most of the negative consequences of
this strategy will fall on the world’s poorest countries
“State and Trends in Adaptation
Report 2021: Africa,”
that report
COMMENTARY
Africa’s youth lost out in Glasgow
Louise Fox
November 18, 2021
7/28/25, 3:05 PM
Africa’s youth lost out in Glasgow | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/africas-youth-lost-out-in-glasgow/
1/4
Most of the focus in Glasgow was on mitigation (prevention of further temperature
increases). Indeed, agreement was reached during COP26 on some key mitigation
measures, including the need to reduce methane emissions, reliance on fossil fuels for
energy generation, and deforestation—in both rich and poor countries. Recognizing
that poor countries could not undertake the needed investments on their own, rich
countries had already agreed back in 2009 to provide concessional financing and
grants to help low- and lower-middle-income countries to build this new infrastructure
—in other words, mitigation financing. However, this commitment remains unrealized:
As noted in the communique, countries had 
, $100
billion by 2020.
Even if global mitigation measures work and temperatures stop rising at some point
during this century, African countries will still experience negative effects, starting
now, at least until 2050.
But preventing a worsening of future global climate risks by reducing emissions in
Africa—the region that emits the least—hardly changes the equation for Africa. The
real problem for Africa is now. Even if global mitigation measures work and
temperatures stop rising at some point during this century, African countries will still
experience negative effects, starting now, at least until 2050. Countries need to adapt
their development strategies and investments now, especially because climate change
and the need for adaptation will raise the cost of achieving all development strategies
and goals for the foreseeable future. Needed adaptation to climate change will cost
money, much more money than the $100 billion pledged for mitigation investments.
While mitigation investments in Africa could have long-term payoffs (e.g., in the last
half of this century) if they do succeed in slowing down or halting rising temperatures,
adaptation investments are needed now.
Why these choices matter for youth
. Half of Africa’s population is under the age of 20.
(https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brookings-now/2019/01/18/charts-of-the-week-
africas-changing-demographics/) This group will suffer both the direct effects (e.g.,
severe weather disasters) and the indirect effects—the lost opportunities from needed
not “yet” met the targeted amount
Africa’s children and youth, including those just born, will bear the costs of climate
change
7/28/25, 3:05 PM
Africa’s youth lost out in Glasgow | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/africas-youth-lost-out-in-glasgow/
2/4
investments in other areas that will not be made because public and private funds will
have to be spent on adaptation. The infrastructure Africa badly needs will cost more
because it will have to be more weather-resistant (otherwise it will break down more
often, reducing benefits). African agricultural research and development will have to
up its game dramatically to avoid declines of up to 30 percent in land and labor
productivity. As a result, African countries will have less public money available for
other priorities, such as education, health, and nutrition. Investment in productive
capacity will cost the private sector more too, slowing down growth and
transformation. The result will be lower earnings and increased poverty. The youth of
2030 (ages 5-14 today) will reach their expected peak earnings period by 2045, when
the 
 will be felt—
. This long-term income
damage will substantially affect their and their children’s future.
. But even if additional funding for adaptation investments is
secured, countries will still face difficult choices and trade-offs, including how much to
invest in adaptation now versus building human capital for future earnings growth and
to better cope with future challenges. Despite being the most educated generation
ever in Africa
 in part because of pressing urgent
needs, and in part owing to political exclusion in some countries.
(https://www.brookings.edu/blog/africa-in-focus/2019/03/06/raising-the-voice-of-
young-people-in-governance/) Yet countries will be making key decisions soon.
African youth should be consulted and effectively engaged both in early-stage
investment decisions and monitoring local outcomes.
AUTHOR
Louise Fox Nonresident Senior Fellow - Global Economy and
Development, Africa Growth Initiative
worst economic effects
up to an 80 percent decline in income
growth (about 4 percent per annum) compared to today
Adaptation policies and investments, if started today, could prevent the worst aspects
of this grim future
, African youth have not shown the level of engagement on climate
change shown by youth in other countries,
@LouiseFox_econ
7/28/25, 3:05 PM
Africa’s youth lost out in Glasgow | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/africas-youth-lost-out-in-glasgow/
3/4
The Brookings Institution is committed to quality, independence, and impact.
We are supported by a diverse array of funders (/about-us/annual-report/) . In line with our
values and policies (/about-us/research-independence-and-integrity-policies/) , each
Brookings publication represents the sole views of its author(s).
Copyright 2025 The Brookings Institution
7/28/25, 3:05 PM
Africa’s youth lost out in Glasgow | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/africas-youth-lost-out-in-glasgow/
4/4
