Most experts believe that it will be expensive and challenging to shift from today’s
energy system, which is largely based on fossil fuels with their associated greenhouse
gas emissions, to a new zero-carbon energy system. The size of this challenge is why
changes in government policy have been slow to develop, while greenhouse gas
emissions continue apace.
But a vocal and growing number of analysts believe that decarbonizing the energy
system will be surprisingly easy and free. Many believers in cheap decarbonization
focus on the promise of renewable energy, despite the fact that there are many ways
to cut emissions. We have the technology now to move to a carbon-free economy, so
they say, if only vested political interests from fossil fuel companies would get out of
the way.
In 
 released today in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, a number of scientists—including David Victor, the co-director
of the Cross-Brookings Initiative on Energy and Climate—aim to put this idea to rest.
The article is a rebuttal to an 
, written by Mark Jacobson of
Stanford University and several co-authors, which claims that all U.S. energy end uses
(including electricity, transportation, heating/cooling, and industry) can be supplied
using only wind, solar, and water power by 2050-2055 at lower cost than using fossil
fuels. Jacobson et al specifically exclude other zero-carbon sources of energy,
a pathbreaking new article
attention-grabbing paper
COMMENTARY
The fantasy of quick and easy renewable energy
Samantha Gross
June 19, 2017
7/28/25, 2:53 PM
The fantasy of quick and easy renewable energy | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-fantasy-of-quick-and-easy-renewable-energy/
1/4
including nuclear, bioenergy, and combustion of fossil or biofuels with carbon capture
and storage (CCS).
The notion that a zero-carbon future is close at hand and inexpensive is certainly
appealing. Climate change is one of the great challenges of our time, with its origins at
the very heart of the modern economy and its worst effects global, uncertain, and
delayed. But as David Victor and the other authors demonstrate, moving to a zero-
carbon system so quickly isn’t easy. The point of the rebuttal paper is not to say that a
low-carbon future is an impossible or pointless goal. Rather, the authors stress that
overly optimistic analyses and assumptions can get in the way of true progress toward
decarbonizing the energy system and can decrease the world’s motivation to develop
new and innovative technologies.
About those assumptions…
Meeting all U.S. energy needs using only wind, solar, and water energy requires some
heroic assumptions, in the electricity sector and in other energy-consuming
applications. These leaps of faith underlie the analysis of Jacobson et al and bring all
of their paper’s conclusions into question. The most important and challenging
assumptions lie in balancing the electric grid and in establishing a hydrogen economy.
Electricity is pivotal. In the electricity grid, supply and demand must be in balance at
all times. Given the intermittent and non-dispatchable nature of wind and solar power,
aligning supply and demand in the system relying only on wind, solar, and water power
is a huge challenge. But this is a key place where the Jacobson et al analysis drifts into
fantasy. In their analysis, Jacobson et al use three main tools to bring the grid into
balance—very large amounts of energy storage, a nationally integrated electric grid,
and vast amounts of load shifting to times when more power is available.
Inexpensive, efficient storage of non-fossil energy is the holy grail of energy research,
and would truly be a game-changer for effectively integrating intermittent renewable
sources into the grid. However, no storage system is currently available at nearly the
scale that Jacobson et al envisages—with capacity more than twice the entire
capacity of all power plants in the United States today.  Their analysis assumes growth
in hydroelectric pumped storage, vast amounts of underground thermal storage, and
storage in phase change materials at concentrated solar plants. Jacobson et al
7/28/25, 2:53 PM
The fantasy of quick and easy renewable energy | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-fantasy-of-quick-and-easy-renewable-energy/
2/4
assume a massive change in how existing hydroelectric dam infrastructure can be
ramped up and down to store energy and produce electricity on demand, even though
physical and environmental limits will make this all but impossible. Underground
thermal storage is not yet demonstrated at scale, but the analysis assumes that
underground thermal storage will be deployed in nearly every home, business, office
building, hospital, school, and factory in the United States by 2050. Phase change
materials for energy storage are still at the research and demonstration phase, but
play an important role in the analysis.
Assumptions about shaping electricity demand to meet variable supply are also
challenging. Jacobsen et al assume nearly 2,000 gigawatts of load shifting, but do not
calculate the costs related to shifting demand over time. In this world of time-flexible
demand, excess production capacity would be needed in industries that operate only
when power is available, compared to the capacity needed if they operated
consistently. This would certainly raise capital and production costs, but such costs
are not considered in the analysis.
For the parts of the energy system that are difficult to electrify, Jacobson et al assume
a shift to hydrogen, with a massive scale-up of hydrogen production and use.
Hydrogen is an energy carrier rather than an energy source, more like electricity than
oil. Thus, hydrogen must be generated in this system using wind, solar, and water
power, at a peak rate that consumes nearly 2,000 gigawatts of electricity, twice the
current U.S. electricity generating capacity. Jacobson et al assume that hydrogen
powers half of the transportation sector and 11 percent of energy intensive industry.
Additionally, the cost and feasibility of transitioning industries to hydrogen are not
accounted for. Certain applications that require high heat or high energy density, such
as cement, steel, and aviation, are likely to be challenging to adapt to hydrogen.
[P]retending that the solutions are cheap and easy is ultimately not helpful
for combating the challenge of climate change.
All of these are practical criticisms of a near-term shift to an energy system entirely
reliant on wind, solar, and water. But the deeper level of criticism is about the focus on
establishing an energy system that excludes many other sources of low- or zero-
carbon energy. Nuclear energy, bioenergy, and fossil fuel sources (particularly with
CCS) may have roles to play in future energy systems, and excluding them a priori is
7/28/25, 2:53 PM
The fantasy of quick and easy renewable energy | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-fantasy-of-quick-and-easy-renewable-energy/
3/4
likely to increase the cost of achieving climate change goals. Jacobson et al exclude
these sources based on a number of unconventional assumptions about their costs
and emissions that differ from the scientific consensus, including the work of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.  For example, 
attributes to nuclear power up to 19 years of fossil-based emissions during the
construction phase of a reactor and emissions from nuclear weapons use assumed to
periodically occur on a 30-year cycle.
Thought experiments about future zero-carbon energy systems are important, to
consider how an energy transition can play out and where the biggest challenges in
such a transition lie. But one can’t let dogma get in the way—the world’s reaction to
climate change must be politically and economically durable enough to last for
generations. Unnecessarily limiting technology options or pretending that the solutions
are cheap and easy is ultimately not helpful for combating the challenge of climate
change.
AUTHOR
Samantha Gross Director - Energy Security and Climate Initiative,
Fellow - Foreign Policy, Energy Security and Climate Initiative
The Brookings Institution is committed to quality, independence, and impact.
We are supported by a diverse array of funders (/about-us/annual-report/) . In line with our
values and policies (/about-us/research-independence-and-integrity-policies/) , each
Brookings publication represents the sole views of its author(s).
Jacobson’s earlier work 
@samanthaenergy
Copyright 2025 The Brookings Institution
7/28/25, 2:53 PM
The fantasy of quick and easy renewable energy | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-fantasy-of-quick-and-easy-renewable-energy/
4/4
